Engineering, Built Environment and IT
Department of Computer Science
COS314
Artificial Intelligence
Assignment Three
Due: 24 May 2025
Instructions
• A zipped folder containing the data for this assignment is attached.
• Only Java or C++ may be used to complete this assignment.
• The programs must be executable (JAR) and be able to run without linking to libraries via the IDE (in the
case of C++). Please note the programs will not be run in IDEs but as a piece of commercial software (marks
may be lost if this is not complied with).
• Read-me instructions are to be included.
• NB: Both the Report and Code need to be submitted. One will not be marked without the other.
• Submission is through Clickup; no email submissions will be allowed.
• For evaluation and replication all code must be seeded and run by initially requesting the seed value and
necessary filepath and parameters.
• This is a group project (team of 4 (1-GP, 2-MLP,3-DT, 4-Report). The report must contain the names of all
the group members. All members of the group are to submit the assignment package individually.
• Marking may be through Demo, this will be confirmed.
Background
Machine learning (ML) has emerged as a powerful tool for financial forecasting, enabling more accurate predictions
and insights into complex financial systems. By leveraging historical data, ML models can identify patterns, trends,
and relationships that traditional statistical methods may miss.
1. Question 30 Marks (Structure and quality of the report is 10 Marks)
To implement 3 Machine Learning models that can predict (classification) whether a financial stock should be
purchased based on historical data. The following specifications of the models are stipulated.
1. Genetic Programming classification algorithm. (10 marks)
2. Multi-Layer Perceptron. (Python library may be used) (5 marks)
3. Decision tree. ( J48 from the Weka Package) (5 marks)
1
Figure 1: Results Table
A folder containing a training and test set is made available. The report must detail the design specification of
the GP, MLP and J48 and the results table. Additionally, statistical tests (Wilcoxon signed-rank test) should
be carried out between GP and MLP and detailed in the report to evaluate the significance of the differences in
performance.
Acc - accuracy, F1 - F1 score.
The official Weka website is available at https://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/.
References
1 Koza, J.R., 1994. Genetic programming as a means for programming computers by natural selection. Statistics
and computing, 4, pp.87-112.
2 Popescu, M.C., Balas, V.E., Perescu-Popescu, L. and Mastorakis, N., 2009. Multilayer perceptron and neural
networks. WSEAS Transactions on Circuits and Systems, 8(7), pp.579-588.
3 Singhal, S. and Jena, M., 2013. A study on WEKA tool for data preprocessing, classification and clustering.
International Journal of Innovative technology and exploring engineering (IJItee), 2(6), pp.250-253.
Page 2